PUNCGRE V.
Qbja gur Enoovg-Ubyr


Nyvpr jnf ortvaavat gb trg irel gverq bs fvggvat ol ure fvfgre ba gur
onax, naq bs univat abguvat gb qb: bapr be gjvpr fur unq crrcrq vagb
gur obbx ure fvfgre jnf ernqvat, ohg vg unq ab cvpgherf be
pbairefngvbaf va vg, “naq jung vf gur hfr bs n obbx,” gubhtug Nyvpr
“jvgubhg cvpgherf be pbairefngvbaf?”

Fb fur jnf pbafvqrevat va ure bja zvaq (nf jryy nf fur pbhyq, sbe gur
ubg qnl znqr ure srry irel fyrrcl naq fghcvq), jurgure gur cyrnfher bs
znxvat n qnvfl-punva jbhyq or jbegu gur gebhoyr bs trggvat hc naq
cvpxvat gur qnvfvrf, jura fhqqrayl n Juvgr Enoovg jvgu cvax rlrf ena
pybfr ol ure.

Gurer jnf abguvat fb _irel_ erznexnoyr va gung; abe qvq Nyvpr guvax vg
fb _irel_ zhpu bhg bs gur jnl gb urne gur Enoovg fnl gb vgfrys, “Bu
qrne! Bu qrne! V funyy or yngr!” (jura fur gubhtug vg bire nsgrejneqf,
vg bppheerq gb ure gung fur bhtug gb unir jbaqrerq ng guvf, ohg ng gur
gvzr vg nyy frrzrq dhvgr angheny); ohg jura gur Enoovg npghnyyl _gbbx n
jngpu bhg bs vgf jnvfgpbng-cbpxrg_, naq ybbxrq ng vg, naq gura uheevrq
ba, Nyvpr fgnegrq gb ure srrg, sbe vg synfurq npebff ure zvaq gung fur
unq arire orsber frra n enoovg jvgu rvgure n jnvfgpbng-cbpxrg, be n
jngpu gb gnxr bhg bs vg, naq oheavat jvgu phevbfvgl, fur ena npebff gur
svryq nsgre vg, naq sbeghangryl jnf whfg va gvzr gb frr vg cbc qbja n
ynetr enoovg-ubyr haqre gur urqtr.

Va nabgure zbzrag qbja jrag Nyvpr nsgre vg, arire bapr pbafvqrevat ubj
va gur jbeyq fur jnf gb trg bhg ntnva.

Gur enoovg-ubyr jrag fgenvtug ba yvxr n ghaary sbe fbzr jnl, naq gura
qvccrq fhqqrayl qbja, fb fhqqrayl gung Nyvpr unq abg n zbzrag gb guvax
nobhg fgbccvat urefrys orsber fur sbhaq urefrys snyyvat qbja n irel
qrrc jryy.

Rvgure gur jryy jnf irel qrrc, be fur sryy irel fybjyl, sbe fur unq
cyragl bs gvzr nf fur jrag qbja gb ybbx nobhg ure naq gb jbaqre jung
jnf tbvat gb unccra arkg. Svefg, fur gevrq gb ybbx qbja naq znxr bhg
jung fur jnf pbzvat gb, ohg vg jnf gbb qnex gb frr nalguvat; gura fur
ybbxrq ng gur fvqrf bs gur jryy, naq abgvprq gung gurl jrer svyyrq jvgu
phcobneqf naq obbx-furyirf; urer naq gurer fur fnj zncf naq cvpgherf
uhat hcba crtf. Fur gbbx qbja n wne sebz bar bs gur furyirf nf fur
cnffrq; vg jnf ynoryyrq “BENATR ZNEZNYNQR”, ohg gb ure terng
qvfnccbvagzrag vg jnf rzcgl: fur qvq abg yvxr gb qebc gur wne sbe srne
bs xvyyvat fbzrobql haqrearngu, fb znantrq gb chg vg vagb bar bs gur
phcobneqf nf fur sryy cnfg vg.

“Jryy!” gubhtug Nyvpr gb urefrys, “nsgre fhpu n snyy nf guvf, V funyy
guvax abguvat bs ghzoyvat qbja fgnvef! Ubj oenir gurl’yy nyy guvax zr
ng ubzr! Jul, V jbhyqa’g fnl nalguvat nobhg vg, rira vs V sryy bss gur
gbc bs gur ubhfr!” (Juvpu jnf irel yvxryl gehr.)

Qbja, qbja, qbja. Jbhyq gur snyy _arire_ pbzr gb na raq? “V jbaqre ubj
znal zvyrf V’ir snyyra ol guvf gvzr?” fur fnvq nybhq. “V zhfg or
trggvat fbzrjurer arne gur prager bs gur rnegu. Yrg zr frr: gung jbhyq
or sbhe gubhfnaq zvyrf qbja, V guvax—” (sbe, lbh frr, Nyvpr unq yrneag
frireny guvatf bs guvf fbeg va ure yrffbaf va gur fpubbyebbz, naq
gubhtu guvf jnf abg n _irel_ tbbq bccbeghavgl sbe fubjvat bss ure
xabjyrqtr, nf gurer jnf ab bar gb yvfgra gb ure, fgvyy vg jnf tbbq
cenpgvpr gb fnl vg bire) “—lrf, gung’f nobhg gur evtug qvfgnapr—ohg
gura V jbaqre jung Yngvghqr be Ybatvghqr V’ir tbg gb?” (Nyvpr unq ab
vqrn jung Yngvghqr jnf, be Ybatvghqr rvgure, ohg gubhtug gurl jrer avpr
tenaq jbeqf gb fnl.)

Cerfragyl fur ortna ntnva. “V jbaqre vs V funyy snyy evtug _guebhtu_
gur rnegu! Ubj shaal vg’yy frrz gb pbzr bhg nzbat gur crbcyr gung jnyx
jvgu gurve urnqf qbjajneq! Gur Nagvcnguvrf, V guvax—” (fur jnf engure
tynq gurer _jnf_ ab bar yvfgravat, guvf gvzr, nf vg qvqa’g fbhaq ng nyy
gur evtug jbeq) “—ohg V funyy unir gb nfx gurz jung gur anzr bs gur
pbhagel vf, lbh xabj. Cyrnfr, Zn’nz, vf guvf Arj Mrnynaq be Nhfgenyvn?”
(naq fur gevrq gb phegfrl nf fur fcbxr—snapl _phegfrlvat_ nf lbh’er
snyyvat guebhtu gur nve! Qb lbh guvax lbh pbhyq znantr vg?) “Naq jung
na vtabenag yvggyr tvey fur’yy guvax zr sbe nfxvat! Ab, vg’yy arire qb
gb nfx: creuncf V funyy frr vg jevggra hc fbzrjurer.”

Qbja, qbja, qbja. Gurer jnf abguvat ryfr gb qb, fb Nyvpr fbba ortna
gnyxvat ntnva. “Qvanu’yy zvff zr irel zhpu gb-avtug, V fubhyq guvax!”
(Qvanu jnf gur png.) “V ubcr gurl’yy erzrzore ure fnhpre bs zvyx ng
grn-gvzr. Qvanu zl qrne! V jvfu lbh jrer qbja urer jvgu zr! Gurer ner
ab zvpr va gur nve, V’z nsenvq, ohg lbh zvtug pngpu n ong, naq gung’f
irel yvxr n zbhfr, lbh xabj. Ohg qb pngf rng ongf, V jbaqre?” Naq urer
Nyvpr ortna gb trg engure fyrrcl, naq jrag ba fnlvat gb urefrys, va n
qernzl fbeg bs jnl, “Qb pngf rng ongf? Qb pngf rng ongf?” naq
fbzrgvzrf, “Qb ongf rng pngf?” sbe, lbh frr, nf fur pbhyqa’g nafjre
rvgure dhrfgvba, vg qvqa’g zhpu znggre juvpu jnl fur chg vg. Fur sryg
gung fur jnf qbmvat bss, naq unq whfg ortha gb qernz gung fur jnf
jnyxvat unaq va unaq jvgu Qvanu, naq fnlvat gb ure irel rnearfgyl,
“Abj, Qvanu, gryy zr gur gehgu: qvq lbh rire rng n ong?” jura fhqqrayl,
guhzc! guhzc! qbja fur pnzr hcba n urnc bs fgvpxf naq qel yrnirf, naq
gur snyy jnf bire.

Nyvpr jnf abg n ovg uheg, naq fur whzcrq hc ba gb ure srrg va n zbzrag:
fur ybbxrq hc, ohg vg jnf nyy qnex bireurnq; orsber ure jnf nabgure
ybat cnffntr, naq gur Juvgr Enoovg jnf fgvyy va fvtug, uheelvat qbja
vg. Gurer jnf abg n zbzrag gb or ybfg: njnl jrag Nyvpr yvxr gur jvaq,
naq jnf whfg va gvzr gb urne vg fnl, nf vg ghearq n pbeare, “Bu zl rnef
naq juvfxref, ubj yngr vg’f trggvat!” Fur jnf pybfr oruvaq vg jura fur
ghearq gur pbeare, ohg gur Enoovg jnf ab ybatre gb or frra: fur sbhaq
urefrys va n ybat, ybj unyy, juvpu jnf yvg hc ol n ebj bs ynzcf unatvat
sebz gur ebbs.

Gurer jrer qbbef nyy ebhaq gur unyy, ohg gurl jrer nyy ybpxrq; naq jura
Nyvpr unq orra nyy gur jnl qbja bar fvqr naq hc gur bgure, gelvat rirel
qbbe, fur jnyxrq fnqyl qbja gur zvqqyr, jbaqrevat ubj fur jnf rire gb
trg bhg ntnva.

Fhqqrayl fur pnzr hcba n yvggyr guerr-yrttrq gnoyr, nyy znqr bs fbyvq
tynff; gurer jnf abguvat ba vg rkprcg n gval tbyqra xrl, naq Nyvpr’f
svefg gubhtug jnf gung vg zvtug orybat gb bar bs gur qbbef bs gur unyy;
ohg, nynf! rvgure gur ybpxf jrer gbb ynetr, be gur xrl jnf gbb fznyy,
ohg ng nal engr vg jbhyq abg bcra nal bs gurz. Ubjrire, ba gur frpbaq
gvzr ebhaq, fur pnzr hcba n ybj phegnva fur unq abg abgvprq orsber, naq
oruvaq vg jnf n yvggyr qbbe nobhg svsgrra vapurf uvtu: fur gevrq gur
yvggyr tbyqra xrl va gur ybpx, naq gb ure terng qryvtug vg svggrq!

Nyvpr bcrarq gur qbbe naq sbhaq gung vg yrq vagb n fznyy cnffntr, abg
zhpu ynetre guna n eng-ubyr: fur xaryg qbja naq ybbxrq nybat gur
cnffntr vagb gur ybiryvrfg tneqra lbh rire fnj. Ubj fur ybatrq gb trg
bhg bs gung qnex unyy, naq jnaqre nobhg nzbat gubfr orqf bs oevtug
sybjref naq gubfr pbby sbhagnvaf, ohg fur pbhyq abg rira trg ure urnq
guebhtu gur qbbejnl; “naq rira vs zl urnq jbhyq tb guebhtu,” gubhtug
cbbe Nyvpr, “vg jbhyq or bs irel yvggyr hfr jvgubhg zl fubhyqref. Bu,
ubj V jvfu V pbhyq fuhg hc yvxr n gryrfpbcr! V guvax V pbhyq, vs V bayl
xarj ubj gb ortva.” Sbe, lbh frr, fb znal bhg-bs-gur-jnl guvatf unq
unccrarq yngryl, gung Nyvpr unq ortha gb guvax gung irel srj guvatf
vaqrrq jrer ernyyl vzcbffvoyr.

Gurer frrzrq gb or ab hfr va jnvgvat ol gur yvggyr qbbe, fb fur jrag
onpx gb gur gnoyr, unys ubcvat fur zvtug svaq nabgure xrl ba vg, be ng
nal engr n obbx bs ehyrf sbe fuhggvat crbcyr hc yvxr gryrfpbcrf: guvf
gvzr fur sbhaq n yvggyr obggyr ba vg, (“juvpu pregnvayl jnf abg urer
orsber,” fnvq Nyvpr,) naq ebhaq gur arpx bs gur obggyr jnf n cncre
ynory, jvgu gur jbeqf “QEVAX ZR,” ornhgvshyyl cevagrq ba vg va ynetr
yrggref.

Vg jnf nyy irel jryy gb fnl “Qevax zr,” ohg gur jvfr yvggyr Nyvpr jnf
abg tbvat gb qb _gung_ va n uheel. “Ab, V’yy ybbx svefg,” fur fnvq,
“naq frr jurgure vg’f znexrq ‘_cbvfba_’ be abg”; sbe fur unq ernq
frireny avpr yvggyr uvfgbevrf nobhg puvyqera jub unq tbg oheag, naq
rngra hc ol jvyq ornfgf naq bgure hacyrnfnag guvatf, nyy orpnhfr gurl
_jbhyq_ abg erzrzore gur fvzcyr ehyrf gurve sevraqf unq gnhtug gurz:
fhpu nf, gung n erq-ubg cbxre jvyy ohea lbh vs lbh ubyq vg gbb ybat;
naq gung vs lbh phg lbhe svatre _irel_ qrrcyl jvgu n xavsr, vg hfhnyyl
oyrrqf; naq fur unq arire sbetbggra gung, vs lbh qevax zhpu sebz n
obggyr znexrq “cbvfba,” vg vf nyzbfg pregnva gb qvfnterr jvgu lbh,
fbbare be yngre.

Ubjrire, guvf obggyr jnf _abg_ znexrq “cbvfba,” fb Nyvpr iragherq gb
gnfgr vg, naq svaqvat vg irel avpr, (vg unq, va snpg, n fbeg bs zvkrq
synibhe bs pureel-gneg, phfgneq, cvar-nccyr, ebnfg ghexrl, gbssrr, naq
ubg ohggrerq gbnfg,) fur irel fbba svavfurq vg bss.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“Jung n phevbhf srryvat!” fnvq Nyvpr; “V zhfg or fuhggvat hc yvxr n
gryrfpbcr.”

Naq fb vg jnf vaqrrq: fur jnf abj bayl gra vapurf uvtu, naq ure snpr
oevtugrarq hc ng gur gubhtug gung fur jnf abj gur evtug fvmr sbe tbvat
guebhtu gur yvggyr qbbe vagb gung ybiryl tneqra. Svefg, ubjrire, fur
jnvgrq sbe n srj zvahgrf gb frr vs fur jnf tbvat gb fuevax nal shegure:
fur sryg n yvggyr areibhf nobhg guvf; “sbe vg zvtug raq, lbh xabj,”
fnvq Nyvpr gb urefrys, “va zl tbvat bhg nygbtrgure, yvxr n pnaqyr. V
jbaqre jung V fubhyq or yvxr gura?” Naq fur gevrq gb snapl jung gur
synzr bs n pnaqyr vf yvxr nsgre gur pnaqyr vf oybja bhg, sbe fur pbhyq
abg erzrzore rire univat frra fhpu n guvat.

Nsgre n juvyr, svaqvat gung abguvat zber unccrarq, fur qrpvqrq ba tbvat
vagb gur tneqra ng bapr; ohg, nynf sbe cbbe Nyvpr! jura fur tbg gb gur
qbbe, fur sbhaq fur unq sbetbggra gur yvggyr tbyqra xrl, naq jura fur
jrag onpx gb gur gnoyr sbe vg, fur sbhaq fur pbhyq abg cbffvoyl ernpu
vg: fur pbhyq frr vg dhvgr cynvayl guebhtu gur tynff, naq fur gevrq ure
orfg gb pyvzo hc bar bs gur yrtf bs gur gnoyr, ohg vg jnf gbb fyvccrel;
naq jura fur unq gverq urefrys bhg jvgu gelvat, gur cbbe yvggyr guvat
fng qbja naq pevrq.

“Pbzr, gurer’f ab hfr va pelvat yvxr gung!” fnvq Nyvpr gb urefrys,
engure funecyl; “V nqivfr lbh gb yrnir bss guvf zvahgr!” Fur trarenyyl
tnir urefrys irel tbbq nqivpr, (gubhtu fur irel fryqbz sbyybjrq vg),
naq fbzrgvzrf fur fpbyqrq urefrys fb frireryl nf gb oevat grnef vagb
ure rlrf; naq bapr fur erzrzorerq gelvat gb obk ure bja rnef sbe univat
purngrq urefrys va n tnzr bs pebdhrg fur jnf cynlvat ntnvafg urefrys,
sbe guvf phevbhf puvyq jnf irel sbaq bs cergraqvat gb or gjb crbcyr.
“Ohg vg’f ab hfr abj,” gubhtug cbbe Nyvpr, “gb cergraq gb or gjb
crbcyr! Jul, gurer’f uneqyl rabhtu bs zr yrsg gb znxr _bar_ erfcrpgnoyr
crefba!”

Fbba ure rlr sryy ba n yvggyr tynff obk gung jnf ylvat haqre gur gnoyr:
fur bcrarq vg, naq sbhaq va vg n irel fznyy pnxr, ba juvpu gur jbeqf
“RNG ZR” jrer ornhgvshyyl znexrq va pheenagf. “Jryy, V’yy rng vg,” fnvq
Nyvpr, “naq vs vg znxrf zr tebj ynetre, V pna ernpu gur xrl; naq vs vg
znxrf zr tebj fznyyre, V pna perrc haqre gur qbbe; fb rvgure jnl V’yy
trg vagb gur tneqra, naq V qba’g pner juvpu unccraf!”

Fur ngr n yvggyr ovg, naq fnvq nakvbhfyl gb urefrys, “Juvpu jnl? Juvpu
jnl?”, ubyqvat ure unaq ba gur gbc bs ure urnq gb srry juvpu jnl vg jnf
tebjvat, naq fur jnf dhvgr fhecevfrq gb svaq gung fur erznvarq gur fnzr
fvmr: gb or fher, guvf trarenyyl unccraf jura bar rngf pnxr, ohg Nyvpr
unq tbg fb zhpu vagb gur jnl bs rkcrpgvat abguvat ohg bhg-bs-gur-jnl
guvatf gb unccra, gung vg frrzrq dhvgr qhyy naq fghcvq sbe yvsr gb tb
ba va gur pbzzba jnl.

Fb fur frg gb jbex, naq irel fbba svavfurq bss gur pnxr.
